So in the last few videos,
we've been working towards creating a listbox class
that can load its data from a database table
and also tell other listboxes
when they should refresh their data.
Now, we had that working with a basic listbox
by binding a function to a listbox select virtual event
and you can see that here on line 107
so the artistList is our bind and then listboxSelect
to specify the virtual event.
Now, when an item is selected in the artist listbox,
the get_albums function is called.
Now, looking at the get_albums function,
you can see here it here starting on line 55,
it retrieves the artist ID for the selected artist
then selects all the rows from the album's table
for that ID.
Now, the album's data listbox
already performs most of that query in its requery method.
This is the method starting on line 45.
So if we passed in the artist ID to its requery method,
it could then retrieve the albums for a specific artist.
So let's actually start working on that
and we're going to start modifying requery.
Now, what we're going to do is give it a single parameter
which will be the ID to match
and we'll make that default to none
so that we can populate a list with all records
as we did for the artists.
So I'm gonna come up here and change the definition
from self to comma space link_value=None
and then what we wanna do
is add the code on the next line if link_value:
and what we're going to do is put sql = self.sql_select
plus in double quotes where, starting with a space there,
where and a space before the end
plus an artist plus equals question mark plus self.sql_sort.
And we're also going to,
actually what we'll do is change this
and under that line we're going to put print(sql),
put our hash TODO to link this line
'cause it's only a temporary thing.
Then on the next line,
we'll do a self.cursor.execute
and we're gonna execute in parenthesis sql
comma space and then in parenthesis link_value comma
and close off the parenthesis.
Then we're gonna put an else and the else,
we're gonna put these other two statements
to where they were before
and just Tab those out, indent them to the correct level
and then we're gonna leave the other code down the bottom
to do the clear of the listbox
and then go through each item
that we find from the sql select
and insert that into the listbox.
So basically now it's link_value passes an argument
and would be going to be running this code in the else block
which was the code that was there prior.
However, when a link value is provided,
we're inserting this where clause as you can see here
where artist equals and then a place holder question mark
to filter the records.
Now, you might be wondering looking at this code on line 47
why I write the where clause like that
where a query is a single string
instead of concatenating it like I've done.
The reason is that we're gonna have to filter
on different fields to seek the data
that the data listbox is displaying.
So we're gonna be replacing artist as you can see on line 47
with a variable shortly.
So actually though let's see if it works.
Now, we can choose a random artist ID
when we requery the albums list
and that's going to be down here on line 118.
So instead of passing none, we're now passing a parameter.
Let's actually put a number in there 12
which happens to be Wish By Nash
so if we actually run that,
we should hopefully see their three albums pop up.
Those are the select clauses now for albums
where artist equals question mark ordered by name.
And we'll have a look now.
You can see their three albums
correctly showing up from the database.
All right, so that's one side of the problem solved.
A listbox can populate itself with data for a specific ID.
The next step though is to get one listbox to tell another
which ID to use.
Now, we've already got some code for that
and I'll just close this down
and that's the code in the get_albums function
and also the get_songs function.
All right, so what we need to do
is actually change the get_albums method
and what we're going to do is
or what I'm going to do is comment out everything,
actually I'll take a copy of this line so this is artist_id,
paste that in and I'm gonna copy out
or comment out rather everything else
and we're gonna change that now
to use the albums listbox requery method.
So the actual artist_id,
we're gonna change that marginally
just on the end of the line in square brackets
we're gonna put zero
then we're going to do albumList.requery(artist_id).
So at the moment,
artist_id is returned
from the conn.execute call as a topple,
the code ultimately come here.
That was fine when we were using it
to substitute for the question mark in the select string
because parameter substitution calls requires a topple,
but here we only wanna provide a single value
to the requery method
so we're getting the topple
from the fetch one method as per normal,
but then we're actually specifying zero
here in square brackets for the ID value.
And then we're actually requering the albums list
passing it the ID of the artist
that it should display the albums for.
So we run the programme now and choose different artists,
it should result in their albums being displayed
so let's actually check that
and you can see that's obviously working now.
We're gonna have a different album showing
when I select a different artist.
All right, so we can now move that function into our class
and then call it whenever a new item is selected.
Moving it is easy.
It's already in the right place
just after the end of the class
so I've actually got the class here
that we've written our data listbox class
and we want this function to become method in that class.
So what I'm going to do there
is just select the entire function here
like so and then just indent it by pressing Tab
and then we're gonna delete one of those lines
just to keep it happy
and the other thing we need do
is all methods in a class have got a self argument.
I've got self as the first option there
so I'm gonna do a self comma space event.
And obviously I removed the second line
to keep IntelliJ and Python happy.
And we have got some errors and warnings here,
but they're going to actually disappear
as we make some more changes.
First thing we do need to change though is the method name.
Now, it was used just to get albums for an artist
and the duplicated code in get_songs
was used to get the songs for an album.
But now that we've converted it to a method,
we're going to use it to get whatever data
the linked listbox is displaying.
Now, because it's called whenever an item is selected,
it's more appropriate to change the name
to something like say on_select
so let's go ahead and call it that so on_select.
So now that we've done that,
you can see that the on_select method
now follows our requery method in our class.
Now, because this method is now part of the class
that will be getting the listbox select event,
there's now no need to retrieve the widget from an event.
So what we can do is replace the LB with self.
Now, I'm actually gonna print out check first
and it should print true
if self is the same as the events widget
so that we can watch for that when we run the programme.
So I'm gonna put that code in,
I'm gonna do print in parenthesis
self is event.widget
and then put a TODO there to link this line again.
So therefore, we actually change this LB
and change index to actually be self.get(index).
And same for artist name,
we need to change that now to self.get(index).
All right, so at the moment,
we're getting an artist ID on line 65
and that's obviously no use
if we're creating a generic class.
We need to get the ID for whatever table
our data listbox is using to display.
Now, as it happens, we already have a SQL statement
that returns all the conns we're displaying
as well as the IDs.
So up on line 36 up here,
we created the sql_select query string
so we can use that sql and add the where clause to it
then we'll also rename the artist_name
and artist_id variables
'cause we might not be getting names,
the listbox could effectively be displaying anything.
Let's go ahead and do that down here on line 65.
So the conn.execute is going to be self.sql_select
plus and then our where clause
plus where and a space plus self.field
plus and we want the equals
and the question mark place holder there
and then comma space and instead of artist_name,
as I mentioned, we're gonna rename to value and .fetchone
and this time we're going to pass one in square brackets
to get the right value.
So the query returns two columns
and that's why we're changing the index
here on line 65 at the end
which you saw me change from zero to one
because the ID is the second column in the topple.
We need to change the naming of that.
So we have the artist_name but again we wanna rename that
so we're going to call it value
and consequently we can pass that on line 65.
Now, we're gonna get a problem with this line of code
on line 65 and it's one that's quite subtle.
In fact, we wouldn't notice it
until we tried to use that class in another programme.
Now, if you recall, we write the get_albums method
to use the global connexion conn.
Now, if we leave on_select as it is
and try to use it in another programme
that call the connexion something else,
then our method's going to crash.
Of course, if we tested it in another programme
and happen to call the connexion conn as well,
we wouldn't spot the error.
So the point here is to be very careful
when moving functions into a class
and make sure you're not using any global objects
in the function.
So as a result, we need to change the method
to use the class' cursor attribute instead.
And we didn't rename the artist_id yet so let's do that now,
we'll call that link_id to be generic
so instead of it being conn.execute,
we're actually gonna change that now
to do a self.cursor.execute
and because we've called the artist_id link_id on line 65,
on line 66 we're gonna rename that as well
and call that link_id.
All right, so we're almost done,
but we need to handle the scenario
where the data listbox is linked to another one.
So let's work on that in the next video.